good afternoon everyone thanks very much
for joining us uh today we have David
Deutsch uh author of the beginning of
infinity and fabric of reality and
physicists at Oxford and David will talk
about truths and propositions and we
have a slightly different format today
because David will be giving a kind of
this will be a conversation so David
will give a brief couple of remarks on
the topic and then we will
uh yeah have a discussion with David and
I think first Liberty and I will join
into the discussion and later on we'll
open it up for everyone
and with that being said I yeah give for
to David thanks for for joining us at
the poppy Society
hi uh well thanks for having me
um
uh the it's statements propositions and
truths that that I'm going to Muse about
and the the context in which I was
musing
is first of all task is theory of Truth
as adopted by Papa which is called uh
correspondence theory of Truth
and the idea is that um
that uh a statement is true
if if it corresponds to the facts so if
I can uh
yes
right
now there's a statement
and uh there is is a fact and that
statement is true
if and only if
uh that that uh really is a dog
and uh
that's the correspondence theory of
Truth and I I thought it was
satisfactory and uh
uh uh I believed
[Music]
treatment of it but I started musing
further about this in conversations with
Lily Tanner and other people and also
because of the talk that was given here
by Danny Frederick
about a slightly different issue uh
whether truth can be our epistemic aim
um not quite sure what what he meant but
but
uh uh in any case I realized that my own
conception of Truth was somewhat flawed
and I I came up with some ideas to fix
it
which I could have called
I could have called it
um A Simple Theory that resolves all
your misgivings about truth
um
yeah of course it might not resolve all
your misgivings it might not be true
or it might be true but not original to
me in which case it's it's most likely
to be found somewhere in Pauper
anyway so there's a problem what is the
problem well uh for a start
um
uh that's not a dog
that that it differs from a dog in a
number of really vital ways for a start
it's a cartoon no dog actually looks
like that
and secondly when I say this is a dog
how do you know that I'm referring to
that dog and not to some some elephant
that's in the room
so it might be referring to the elephant
in the room and then it would be false
and so I could make it
um I could make it um
uh more precise by saying uh
on this page
this is a dog
uh
that's more precise
but you see the point that I I could go
on adding qualifiers and explanations
and and so on ADD infinitum and it still
wouldn't be completely unambiguous
yet reality
is completely unambiguous
so how can an ambiguous thing correspond
to an ambiguous thing
um and so that's that's one thing that
that's the problem
something that's
perfect and objective
but not directly perceptible that's
that's the dog
um how can that correspond to something
that's imperfect parochial and
perceptible which is any kind of
statement about a dog
anything physical is like an idea in our
brain or a statement in words
which can never be perfect so it can
never be perfectly true
nor can it be perfectly precise and
perfectly and unambiguous
um so
um
uh by the way there's also a a meta
language involved in this theory of
Truth which is which says something like
uh
um
something like that and this is true
if this is a dog
so that's a statement in The Meta
language so there's a sort of triangle
here of of a statement and some reality
and and a meta statement that that's a
task is theory
um
uh oh and another another reason why
apart from being ambiguous and so on
we are fallibleists we expect to improve
our ideas
and so the ideas in our brains and our
statements of them can't be perfect if
they can be improved
um so um
so here's what I thought might might
resolve this so in addition to
statements and some Reality by the way
the reality could be mathematical
reality and so on but I'm using physical
reality because to simplify things
um we could be talking about prime
numbers and exactly the same issue would
arise
um so there are some things here um
which um
uh there there are some other things
which are perfect and pristine and
beyond our reach and but we can which we
can nevertheless talk about and form
theories about and that that is uh the
class of abstractions
um something like what Papa called world
three but but uh I just prefer to say
that the class of all abstractions which
include things like uh you know numbers
like so it's up here there's a number
five that's an abstraction
and and again
I can't draw the number five I can only
draw some marks on my on my iPad screen
[Music]
um
that thing there is just a marks on a
screen and it's not a it's it's not a
five because
um for example
that is not a five it's a 50. even
though it looks exactly like this five
um so uh again any anything I might draw
or say is ambiguous and and uh partly
wrong and and all that stuff but the
thing I'm referring to here the actual
number five that's a perfectly definite
thing
and and there are also up here
propositions so propositions like five
is a prime is a proposition and except I
just what I just said is a statement I
can't say propositions it's impossible
so so there are propositions up here
which I'm representing so there's a p
and a not p and and not p and not p
these are all propositions
and uh this proper and propositions have
the property that they can be true or
false and nothing else absolutely
nothing else there's there's no that
it's the excluded middle and they're
perfectly precise they're perfectly
unambiguous
here are some propositions uh and this
one is actually true uh I mean the
proposition this one proposition I'm
referring to is actually true but
unfortunately that's because it doesn't
assert anything about anything
um and also this p and not P strictly
speaking those aren't propositions
either they stand for propositions they
have propositional variables
so this thing is true because it's true
regardless of what P stands for
but uh just just this one is is uh is a
propositional variable and it stands for
something that's either true or false
but it itself just represents that it's
it's a variable by the way it's quite
usual in talking about the world and
about ideas that we're we're super used
to
uh things that stand for other things
and calling the things that stand for
other things the things
and sometimes we have to be careful and
make sure that the the like the map
isn't confused with the territory as
they say
but usually one can disambiguate
sufficiently well but that's just
another level of ambiguity that that
that is is cannot be perfectly resolved
so if I try to write down here
um an actual proposition
uh the traditional ones are things like
um maybe I can change color
uh I hope this works
yes
okay so uh there's a traditional
proposition all men are mortal and It
suffers from the usual ambiguity
um like like uh whether this refers to
people who were alive at the time of
Aristotle or something it's not clear
whether men includes women or whether
men includes men who've already died or
men who have yet to be born and and uh
and so on so
uh but nevertheless
there is an idealization we can think of
which is that
um qualified by an infinite number of
qualifiers as it were enough to make it
which you could never actually do in
real life but uh this this kind of
represents a real proposition somewhere
in there and this proposition could be
true
of of the world
um with with uh people in it and so on
and and they're either all Mortal or not
all mortal and then that's true if they
are all mortal
um
uh so
the more do you try to Define this the
the the more vague it gets but like with
the five and uh and so on there's a real
thing there a real abstract thing and
and here's another real thing the world
and they could correspond with each
other
and
um
uh my idea is that the correspondence
theory of Truth refers to this
correspondence
the correspondence between two to
between an abstract thing and a real
thing both completely unambiguous and
completely objective and our statements
about them are always attempts to
express them well enough to solve
whatever problem we're addressing
so I can uh
um
can I draw a dividing line
anyway if if I can move this aside
I can say that there are the
abstractions
and then there's the the the reality
then there's a correspondence
and then there's a meta theories saying
uh true
if
if they correspond
there's the meta Theory and it refers to
those three things and then there's
statements
these are the uh nasty dirty things that
we can actually say and and this above
this line is is pristine truth and the
exactness and and the the miracle is
that we can actually gain knowledge
about these things we can say things
about them never perfectly
so
um
uh so so we have here instead of instead
of just this abstract uh sorry
statements corresponding to reality
which is what I thought task is theory
of Truth ought to say
it's a triangle it's this this
and this is a triangle and if you like
this this
um
this meta statement uh I have to somehow
bring it out of the page to form a
tetrahedron
so it's either a straight line converted
to a triangle or a triangle converted to
a tetrahedron and that is my theory of
Truth which it is and now you can you
can shoot it down
great thanks so much for
uh yeah well
the introductory statement I so the
first question I have is
how can it be that the
these infinitely long
propositions can be approximated by
finite statements
yes
um I don't think there's any guarantee
that they can
um the um
uh yes
um
well so I
I think the the situation is worse than
what you say because saying that the the
uh abstract perfect thing is like the
imperfect thing with an infinite number
of qualifiers I don't think there's any
any guarantee that even an infinite
number of qualifiers would if even if
that were possible which it isn't
that even that would do
so uh the the how can we
um
uh how can we expect our statements to
correspond to this pristine truth well
um one thing is
there is no guarantee they might not be
able to uh I argue in in my book that
there shouldn't be any limit to how well
we can do this
but even though we can never do it
perfectly
um uh and the
um the thing to remember as always with
papa is is when popper says at least I
think When papa says we're striving for
the truth he always means we're striving
to eliminate error
uh of course we can't be sure of that
either but but when we use truth as a as
a value that we are that we are aspiring
to we're not aspiring to be able to
utter true statements we are aspiring to
eliminate false statements from the
things that we say which always leaves
more false statements
um and
we can't be sure that we haven't
eliminated a true statement
um so I uh there is no guarantee uh and
that there's no there's no reason not
just no guarantee
there's no reason in the structure of
all this
if if I'm right
that that implies that there should be
um
uh statements that that represent
an abstraction perfectly even infinitely
long statements
um so I don't know if that's good enough
maybe it isn't but so you think that we
can guess at the correspondence between
the statements and the abstractions and
that is how we kind of aim to find out
about reality
uh yes uh yes we guess that our
statement is some is some kind of
indicator of the abstraction like if I
say two plus two is four
um that is in the light of a whole slew
of theories that that connect statements
in the English language to to integers
and and then there's a theory of
integers which we can't prove true
either it might be inconsistent for all
we know uh but but uh
somewhere in the set of all abstractions
there are consistent things and we have
a theory that the set of all integers is
a consistent thing and that what we say
about it correspond to True propositions
about that thing
and in all those ways we're bound to be
inaccurate and ambiguous
but nevertheless we might have some
genuine knowledge about it
right
and
I see people raising their hand in the
chat I also think that Liberty is a
question
so let me see go ahead
this might be the same as Sam's question
but
do you is there anything specific in
Danny Frederick's
um kind of skeptical view that you think
this resolves
um
well I I must say I I didn't entirely
understand his skeptical view uh it was
directed against something slightly
different
um from what I'm talking about namely
the question of whether we can regard
science or or just thinking in general
as a quest for truth
and he was saying we can't now I I don't
I don't
see that's a very important question uh
I mean I I'd rather say what we are
doing
rather than say whether it's whether
it's legitimate to call that a quest for
the truth
but I think in the uh you know his was
it was a much longer statement than my
musing here uh I think he also touched
on the problem that I'm talking about
here name namely that we can never
uh capture a proposition
and true or false and therefore we we
can never capture a truth
but I don't think that's important as
long as we know that we're not trying to
capture a truth
so we're trying to eliminate errors and
uh he I think someone asked him that and
he answered and again I didn't quite
understand the answer
so
um uh but but anyway I I think this is
this is a simpler issue uh it's it's I
mean my my problem is
um
uh
if if truth is correspondence with the
facts How can a
uh statement which is incapable of being
true or false
uh correspond to a fact which either is
there or not and you know the that thing
in real life uh there there is
an attribute being a dog which any given
thing has or doesn't have
and we can't specif we can't specify
that unambiguously but we can specify it
unambiguously enough
to meet whatever problem we're trying to
solve
um and uh there's sort of a higher level
thing of whether that counts as pursuing
Truth uh well I I don't really mind I
don't really mind either way
right so this is not trying to address
the kind of skepticism that Danny was
advocating I don't think so
um
then I mean you you really explain it
quite well but then I I still so I
understood your construction from that
conversation with Danny and I I kind of
saw it as a as a defense of realism and
of the aim of science being the search
for truth but
uh
so I think I had a misconception about
what your construction was trying to
address and I see so I think your
problem uh and I think because of that
misconception I also misunderstood the
problem you were trying to solve so
could you re-explain very briefly about
what the problem is that you're trying
to dress with your construction yeah so
uh
given the the
um so here we have some reality that's
pristine that that's sort of perfect and
we have some abstractions which are
pristine and and that's perfect and
therefore it's meaningful to say that
there is a perfect is or isn't a perfect
correspondence between them
and and we can cook when the
correspondence is perfect we can say
that that uh this abstract proposition
is true
and and then there are these statements
which are uh riddled with error and
ambiguity and and uh so on and
uh the problem was how can one of these
possibly correspond to any of that
right so the answer is it can't
uh and and it doesn't it's this which
corresponds to that oh
it it's this which corresponds to that
and we are merely
um guessing
that this is that what this is
and what this is
and what the correspondence is and we're
we're just hoping that that our guesses
are better than our previous guesses
right and no this doesn't our statements
don't actually have to correspond to
anything
in the sense in an exact sense which
would be required if we're defining
truth that way right
would it be fair to say that you are
defending realism oh yes but but I think
Danny would say that he's also defending
realism yes
but we might think he isn't yes
but I really am
we we found we guessed that you really
are yes yes
cool I see uh there's some more people
who have questions uh specifically Luli
as her hand race uh Louis go ahead
yeah so um usually we talk about uh
abstract things which are like
philosophy and maths and then practical
like down to earth things like you know
this water bottle or whatever
um and you're saying that all statements
correspond to abstractions uh is this
like is this like a technical sense or
is there a meaningful difference between
abstract statements and these kind of
like uh practical statements
uh I think it it
whenever we say anything
uh where where
about the world let's say we're doing it
via an abstraction we we don't usually
say so or even think of it in that sense
but that's because of our
uh just being totally accustomed to
having things which stand for things
which stand for things which stand for
things and just just speaking as if the
first one was equal to the last was the
same as the last one but in reality if
you want to make sense of what
theorizing means and what truth means
and and what having a theory about the
physical world or about the abstract
World means
then I think you've got to say well
according to my theory
um you've got to say that that that all
our statements
are are referring to abstractions which
refer to the thing that we're talking
about
rather than just referring to the thing
we're talking about
uh
purely abstract statement sorry
so there's no such thing as a purely
abstract statement or a purely
non-abstract statement
uh well
um there is no such thing as uh yeah I
see what you mean yes well we can't
utter an abstraction
we can only utter physical objects like
like sound waves and and so on so uh we
are purely physical and our theories are
are have always expressed purely
physically
but we can theorize about
let's say the world and about
abstractions and when we say this is a
dog
uh and we say that in the context of
some problem we have
um then
um
uh because there is no such thing as a
correspondence between these statements
and real objects like physical objects
like dogs but there is such a thing as a
correspondence between
an abstract proposition and a physical
object like a dog
therefore we must always be talking
about that abstract proposition whenever
we say things that we're hoping are true
or or truer or whatever
if the concept of Truth applies we must
be talking about propositions because
it's only propositions that can be true
or false
right then I I think I have another
question which is that oh unless Lily
wants to uh expand on her question
I hope I'm not interrupting
if not then no go ahead uh
the your your idea of a statement
is
that is that purely linguistic or
because for example you were talking
about the cartoon dog at the beginning
of the the presentation and
it's it's basically
that that also seems to be in some sense
a statement so it seems to be about not
just sentences that we can construct but
also like the cartoon dog is a statement
that corresponds to some abstraction
uh yes I don't know okay I hadn't
thought of that uh you could call this
dog you could call this Mark that I made
here
um you could call that a statement
uh because but but it would normally be
called more like something like a model
or uh or a representation
um statements models representations and
and utterances and and
um sentences written down all those
things the important thing from my point
of view here is that those are all
physical objects
and so so uh they they can't have the
property of being true or false right
um but yes this is this is uh
this cartoon
is
uh for for present purposes it's a
statement about a dog but I want in this
context I want you to take that as if it
was a real dog so that I can talk about
whether that that other statement there
on the left refers to it or not
a response to it or not but I can't no
matter how I try to talk about
abstractions or reality I can't directly
represent them I can only represent them
as physical objects that aren't them
I see okay thanks
um then Charles I think Charles has his
hand raised go ahead
yes okay thank you hi
and thank you David
um I well it's not a question it's a
many ideas that I think would be quite
cute to relate with other ideas of yours
I recently came about
um chapter five of the fabric of reality
in which you speak about the touring
principle in a very um
grandiose way and namely I was kind of
aware of the idea that computer programs
can be put into correspondence with
um
simulations of physical systems
but the chapter ends with the idea that
not only physical systems can be
or virtual reality rendering or physical
system can be given by computer programs
but also virtual reality renderings of
abstract entities so all that what
mathematicians think and and and all all
men or Mortal or can be also in a sense
thought of abstract renderings well no
virtual reality renderings of abstract
entities
so so the quest of science as search for
truth in in this context of trying to
get a map between our virtual reality
renderings of the of the reality out
there can actually make sense no because
this is what we're we're kind of trying
to do to
get our ideas to correspond to the
physical world and uh well yeah but okay
again
sorry I don't have any precise questions
but I I I just think that maybe it it
can give you a the idea of commenting on
this link between the Turing principle
and and this Theory right here
um
well
there's no direct link in that sense I
think because the set of all things that
we can represent in virtual reality is
is basically the set of touring
computable functions
and the
um the
the
abstractions that we can speak of are a
much larger set than that
uh we we can talk about say the real
numbers uh without making a virtual
reality rendering of all real numbers
um
so I thought you were going to say
therefore
our quest to understand the abstract
world is exactly the same Quest as our
quest to understand the physical world
and they are both done by by making
guesses about these abstractions which
are propositions
and that I would have agreed with
entirely
uh but I I don't think it's the case
that we are just investigating the
computable
we can
perfectly well investigate the
non-computable
but don't we investigate the
non-computable through models of real
numbers yeah but that that's it yeah I
mean we're we're poor imperfect
creatures we we also investigated
through through much more crude things
than just models we we investigate it
through things like neurons and moving
lips and so on
uh it's it's kind of miracle if if this
is maybe an answer to Sam's question at
the beginning it's it's maybe a kind of
Miracle but something so crude and
error-prone as as our as the part of the
physical world that we control
can have such tremendous reach not only
in the physical world but into
abstractions
uh I don't think it's the case that that
we that we are limited we're Limited in
what we can model
but but to think of knowledge as just a
model is not is not true
um we're we're we can talk about things
that we can't model we can understand
things that we can't model
but how do we understand them if we
don't give ourselves
some theory in in some virtual reality
rendering of no no the real numbers for
example yeah yeah most mathematicians
think that that P doesn't equal NP
and uh it could be true that P doesn't
equal end suppose it's true and suppose
it's not not uh decidable
well we can still perfectly well have a
theory that P doesn't equal NP it
doesn't stop us at all the fact is
undecidable we can even argue for and
against that proposition
um because argument isn't proof
and by the way proof is useless without
explanatory argument
yeah I think that's a very nice point
because obviously
mathematicians and do research into
which functions aren't aren't computable
so they have to be able to tell
something they have to be able to
describe those kinds of abstractions in
some way
otherwise they they couldn't do their
research we couldn't be having this
conversation about them right now yes
and and to before they can prove
anything they will have had a conjecture
uh you know mathematician could spend 10
years proving that such and such as such
as such a proposition is undecidable
but that's because the mathematician
will have had arguments in mind
that not only that
it is undecidable but that there's a way
of proving it and so on and if he fails
to prove it he may still think it's
undecidable and and I think P doesn't
equal NP is a good example of of how
easily that can be true
everybody believes that and it could be
that nobody will ever prove it
yes that's an excellent point
um yeah Charles uh I'm not sure if I'm
interrupting your conversation yeah no
it's good it's good um uh I'll think
about it thank you great and then by the
way another thing is is just that the
the arithmetic of the integers is
consistent again everybody believes that
too
but it's unprovable yes
yeah
yes I think there's various paradoxes
that pop up here
um anyway I uh I see there's another
question in the chat uh by Jake
I'm gonna misping out his name sorry uh
Jake orthwine I hope I said that right
go ahead
yeah thanks um so I I have a question
about this relationship between I guess
I guess it could apply both to the
relationship between our statements and
the abstractions and to the relationship
between the abstractions and the world
I'm sort of more concerned about the
relationship between the abstractions in
the world but I guess I'm wondering
about what the what it would mean to say
that the abstraction corresponds to the
world or even refers to the world that
certain you know pieces of the
abstraction pick out certain things in
the world and not others to refer to
them and what the what the nature of
that relationship is independent of
whether it's true what does it mean to
even reference well you're quite right
that that could be an abstraction there
are abstractions out there that don't
claim anything
they uh let's say you could have you
could have the
the
um
the mathematical model of uh uh of
of the standard model of particle
physics and let's suppose that that was
true it still wouldn't be an assertion
so so it couldn't it it
whether it it can whether it um
uh
corresponds to anything depends on what
it's claimed to correspond to because if
somebody said that that claimed that
that mathematical model is a model is a
mathematic man there's a mathematical
model of the weather on the planet Earth
then that would be false
so the the claim is another abstraction
so the proposition would be something
like
um the real world the real physical
world consists of fields and particles
that obey these equations and then some
equations
and then that that abstraction would
have made a claim about the real world
but doesn't that like threaten a kind of
infinite recursion there where it's
never actually getting explained how it
is that say the the the referent of
particles picks out certain things in
the world and not others I just lost
David's face I don't know if he's there
uh I'm still here yeah
uh
so the question is like so it's not so
much whether this description of
particles is true of the world it's what
does it mean to pick out some subset of
the world and designate that particles
and and therefore have this reference
relationship between part of the
implication of of this proposition that
I'm imagining is that there is a
physically real world
so that's one thing it would have to
imply and then it would say in this
physical real world there are things
like electrons and so on and they obey
these equations
now it could be that there that that
still doesn't say what distinguishes the
physically real world from
um uh from anything else and it it uh it
doesn't explain why there is one and
only one of those and there could be
none of those or there could be three of
those or uh or whatever
um so but that's just uh that's just a
consequence of the fact that I can't
imagine this perfectly exact proposition
uh it doesn't say that that in the world
of abstractions there isn't a
proposition about the world which is
capable of being true or false
um if if it's if you think of the true
one then there is also just not that
which is definitely a false one though
it's not an explanation because as I'm
always saying the negation of an
explanation is never an explanation
but the the proposition which is an
explanation could be true it might not
be the whole truth about the world it is
talking about the standard model in the
world but that could be true and if it
claims that it is true then it's a claim
about the world including
a claimed there is one and only in one
world and and physical world I mean so I
I as a sort of one more one more related
question so I guess it's not that
there's a world that seems problematic
to me but the division of that into an
ontology and kind of how you carve the
the joints of that ontology and if you
think about like a a natural language
statement like this is a dog the the
reference relationship there is
it could be accomplished just by
appealing to the context right so if I
communicate this is a dog and you and I
are in the same room and we're having
the same kind of percept of there being
a dog there then the referent of this is
just going to get worked out
automatically by the by the context that
we share
but when we're talking about the the
way reference relationships get
determined between abstractions and the
world I I have no idea how that would be
accomplished and then I also wonder if
we stand in the same relationship to the
abstractions as we stand to the world
which is to say we don't have access to
them why introduce the idea of the
abstractions and not just talk about an
error-prone contextual problem-solving
relationship to the world when I
in the in the in the sentence this is
this is a dog
the word this is indexical it it gets
its meaning from the context the
proposition that that
refers to doesn't have a physical
context so it would have to explain what
this is it would have to say in the
physical world there is uh a planet with
such and such characteristics and at
such and such a Time defined by these
physical characteristics there's a
person sitting in a room
with an animal which is in fact a dog uh
so on but it would it would say all that
with perfect precision
so it couldn't say anything indexical
that's quite that's quite right but I
think the other part of your
hesitation I think I disagree with you
you seem to be assuming
that abstractions inherently must refer
to other abstractions
they they can't get out of the world of
abstractions
but
I think that is not so I've just given
an example of something if it says there
is
there is in physical reality there is
such a thing as physical reality then it
is saying I mean might be false but it's
it's saying something that isn't
referring to just abstractions
yeah no no it's not it's not that I
think that it can't the abstractions
can't uh get outside of abstractions I
guess when you say there is a dog
my my my question is what does it mean
for that piece of the abstraction to
correspond to some particular thing in
physical reality so it's not whether
there's physical reality at all yeah
whether physical reality comes divided
into things like dogs or cups or
whatever other kind of you know everyday
scale if it doesn't then the proposition
will be false
but but then then you seem to be taking
this reference relationship and bringing
it back into this this truth
relationship so so is everything about
whether a proposition refers to the
World subsumed by whether it finally is
true
uh no because it could be asserting
something false about the world
but okay but so then then I guess it but
but if
to say that that if dog doesn't pick out
anything in the world
uh
it's not true and that's why it doesn't
that's why it doesn't refer to the world
it's not dogs that doesn't so
in in my story it started off by saying
there is a real physical world in that
world there was a big bang in the Big
Bang there there were there was a star
which we shall call the sun which uh and
so on and in each case it gives enough
um uh context within the thing it's
referring to to Define it uniquely and
perfectly now if at any point
that doesn't correspond to reality
then the proposition is false it's still
asserting something
you know it could say that that there is
there is this uh uh Planet that's loose
without a star and in that there's a
person called David Deutsch who's
referring to her uh now as as soon as it
has said that
um
it is false but it's still it's still an
assertion it's still a uh in in my
imagination uh a perfectly precise
meaningful assertion
um it's it's an assertion about
something which logically could be like
that but in fact isn't
um
so so if I talk about the sun revolves
around the Earth the Sun has a reference
in physical reality but that statement
about the sun would be false yes but uh
this is I guess
independent of whether that statement is
true or false what does it mean for the
sun in that statement to refer to the
thing in physical reality so so like
like what does it mean to pick out a
thing in physical reality
for the abstraction
the trick I thought of and they're
probably many other tricks is to First
refer to the whole of physical reality
right and then define unambiguously
various bits
of it until you zoom in on the one you
want to talk about
so in this world of abstractions uh
something like a cup gets built up from
the whole of physical reality all the
way up yeah that's one way to do it okay
okay interesting thank you it might be a
more efficient way
okay then uh I think Toby Jake is next
uh Toby go ahead
yes uh in your book you uh I think you
wrote that there's only a finite number
of um
abstractions that could apply to the
physical world namely the computable
abstractions and the countable number
yeah the accountable yeah so if
is it possible if there is a finite
number of abstractions that could apply
to physical theories or unique physical
theories
that we could rescue Popper's
um theory of Truth likeness so that uh
we can get close to the truth because
there's only a finite number of
different physical theories we could
discover
yeah actually I think there's an
infinite number of physical theories uh
it's just countably infinite rather than
finite and unless you unless you are
thinking that that a finite region of
the universe can only contain finitely
many distinct States
which might be the case you know from
the beckenstein bound and so on
uh so yes
um but I think even then
it would be pointless to resurrect
Papa's notion of of uh truth likeness
because
the fact that so
this would allow you to sort of uh say
whether two theories are
lexicographically close to each other in
the dictionary of all possible
statements but that's not what Papa uh
meant by being close he he meant the set
of all implications of the one is
somehow close to the set of all
implications of the other I forget how
it goes it's the the true implications
of one and the other than tautologies
you know he was making it up in that
kind of way
[Music]
um
uh
and that would still be an infinite
number
and I think it would still be infinitely
ambiguous it would depend on what your
purpose was
in in
um uh comparing these two theories one
of them might be closer to the kind of
Truth you want to talk about and the
other one might be close to the kind of
truth that someone else wants to talk
about
um
uh so you know for example there's
there's the kind of truth that that
leads to Accurate predictions and then
there's a kind of truth that leads to
better future theories
so uh why bother I think that popper in
the end
um basically said why bother as well
what I had in mind was
um
I've noticed with theories as they've
gone through time they've got they
changed the kind of invariant symmetry
uh so we had Galilean variants and then
we had the rents and variants and I was
wondering if in that case if we were
seeking hard to varying Essence there is
whether
that process
whether they're you know if they're
there's a finite perhaps there is a
finite number of those different unique
variant mathematical structures which
could apply to our our universe but that
was where I was kind of facing that idea
from
well
um so first of all
if there was just a finite number but it
was 10 to the 500 so we wouldn't be much
better off so if if there was a finite
number and some some people think that
eventually there will be a single
mathematical object which is the only
reasonable one to uh uh to theorize
corresponds with the physical world
um and uh I don't think that would be
the end of the story either because
there'd always be the problem of why why
is that physical object physical why is
that sorry abstract object physically
instantiated and not some other one
yeah
it it couldn't itself contain the
explanation of that
yeah I see I see what you mean there
yeah
but thank you
but then I kind of have a because Toby
mentioned Popper's theory of uh truth
likeness
uh do you think that with this theory of
Correspondence to the truth
that we can we can still talk about
theories containing more truth over time
so I know that this is slightly
different from the problem you're trying
to address and I'm kind of drawing it
back to this conversation we had with
Danny Frederick on the same topic or On
a related topic
and
uh yeah do you think that this feels
anything so first of all my view is that
it's in some cases you can say that one
theory is
um
uh unambiguously better than another
theory because the uh the set of true
implications of one of them includes the
set of
true implications of the other and vice
versa the set of false implications is
contained in the set of false
implications so that but that's not
always the case
and and in that case the the the set of
uh true and false propositions just
overlap
um
uh
but
um
if you if you think of it not in terms
of truths but in terms of knowledge
then when we have eliminated some errors
and we hope not introduced other errors
then we have unambiguously made progress
regardless of what the
true implications are of the of the
relevant theories you know when when we
when we have
um successfully made a vaccine that uh
cures the disease
um
better than all previous medicines
then we have made progress
and uh uh the the question of Truth
doesn't really we don't really need to
measure how much truth it has
um it it might have been built on a
theory of
of RNA which is overturned uh next week
but where the overturning doesn't
actually
um
uh invalidate the the explanations that
led to the vaccine
so in that case inventing the vaccine
was genuine progress as genuine growth
of knowledge even though it used a
theory that was worse than the previous
Theory
I mean maybe that's a bad example
because these things have lots of
different theories associated with them
but but you see what I mean I mean
science is about problem solving so so
is life
and with problems what what we want to
do is eliminate errors if if we can
eliminate some errors it doesn't matter
how true the theory is
yes
yeah I think that's a very nice reply
and
I I also have
what is kind of a devil's advocate uh
criticism of your your theory about
truth good in the
um how I mean we we say that we can
fairly guess that there is this
correspondence that we even for example
this this is a dog corresponds to there
being a dog on the on the page
um but and I think this is what Charles
was alluding to there are many
cases where there is uh
a lot of ambiguity and sometimes
paradoxes that arise when we we try to
write down a statement like uh there's
various Paradox where you say something
like
um I'm
uh let me look it up here it's something
like the smallest positive integer not
definable in under six letters which is
itself
a description
of that intitude
and uh so you have this kind of
self-referential paradox where the the
integer isn't well defined and
um
on
initially that seems to be a perfectly
well defined integer I think when I
first read that sentence they go oh yeah
that must be
an integer that exists
but in fact it doesn't and it's it's
there's a paradox that are Isis how do
we know
that this isn't always the case that
there is that there aren't many of these
uh things plaguing are statements that
our statements are much
much too vague to ever kind of reach out
into the abstractions
um yeah well again we can't be sure and
it you know if if the integer if the
arithmetically inches really is
inconsistent then we're talking nonsense
most of the time uh
uh at least we're talking nonsense in
the sense of
logical implications of what we say
but not in the sense of problem solving
all our theories are false that doesn't
mean they don't contain knowledge
and a theory such as whoops
why does it keep doing that
can you can you see the dog again yeah
we can see the dog again
weird
um yes uh
uh sorry lost lost my lost my train of
thought yes I think in a way I was just
re-asking the question I asked initially
um and I I just like the example of
various Paradox but yeah I think oh yes
yeah a little bit very so that's one of
many ambiguities that that you can
accidentally slip in
a sentence from The Meta language
and mistake it for a a sentence from the
language because we use English for both
so you know it's an understandable uh
mistake to make
so uh when when you when you say the
least integer not definable you should
be saying definable within what language
and what axioms rather than just
definable definable is is a meaningless
concept without saying what axioms
you're defining it and what language in
what you're defining it in so but that's
as you say
how do we know that there aren't
infinitely many ambiguities
like that which render meaningless
everything we say
well there could be there could be but
uh we are we have good explanation
a good explanation to the effect that we
are in fact
um eliminating errors in our ideas even
if they're inconsistent we're still
eliminating errors from them
yes and also we
as I said it was kind of a devil's
advocate uh criticism because of course
Barry's Paradox is a very specific
Paradox like not we and we discovered it
because other sentences aren't like
berries Peridot right yes yes but I I
took you to mean you know just you know
that could arise and creep up on us uh
and and there could be things that we
don't know about that could also creep
up on us yeah exactly but we still like
we have discovered a particular error
in the case of various Paradox and
whenever those errors uh arise we we
tend to notice them and correct them and
then go on to the next thing which is
which is why we learn about paradoxes
like various paradox
uh
so um yeah there's more questions in the
chat
uh I see Denny
uh Oregon go ahead uh ask me a question
if you want
otherwise
hi uh I have a question about a
mathematical truth I mean it's a more
technical question you mentioned earlier
the P equals MP problem the possibility
that that this might be undecidable at
some point but living aside our
abilities to settle those questions or
not consider the the Continuum
hypothesis which we know for the joint
work of the other and Cohen that is
undecidable from terminal of Frankel
City with taxi of choice I mean that's a
perfectly well-formed mathematical
statement do you think that it expresses
a proposition uh which is either true or
false despite being uh uh undecidable
because there are a lot of mathematical
philosophers which think that this is
just an indeterminate mathematical
statement
yes uh so I disagree with those uh
philosophers of mathematics
um I think that a perfectly uh
well-formed mathematical proposition is
either true or false independently of
whether it is decidable or not
and decidable is in any case a matter of
physics so it seems to me uh ridiculous
to
um base a theory of mathematical
abstractions on what physics does or
does not happen to be able to model
well that means I'm not sure whether set
theory is really about physics because
it postulates a lot of Infinities that
go beyond anything that physics might
study no that that doesn't matter it's
it's not that sets uh that have to be
finite it's it's the it's the method of
proof
so it
um
mathematics assumes
um that a proof is a finite uh sequence
of propositions uh Each of which uh
follows from the previous ones by rules
of inference which are also finite that
finally many of them they're finally
long and so on and the proof is a finite
one of those and finite here just means
can be instantiated in a physical object
um it it uh so
um
uh it's perfectly possible logically
possible that physics is different from
the way we think it is and that
um uh the rules of inference are really
either more extensive than we think or
less extensive and uh it could be that
that
um the Continuum hypothesis could be
added as an axiom and actually be true
of something
such as the infinite things that we want
to talk about
uh
P equals MP is maybe a better example
because the doesn't the Continuum
hypothesis thing rests on the fact that
that there could be models in which it's
true and models in which it isn't true
yeah I mean God will proved one side
then cool and proved another side
right so but of course those those
proofs
are not final they could be mistakes
found in them they they are definitely
ambiguous
so the ambiguity could be resolved one
way or another and it could be that our
notion of proof our notion of infinite
uh our notion of sets will be changed
again just as if they have been changed
in the past
well I I'm not sure how this I mean
assuming they didn't do mistakes in the
approved their mathematical ethereums so
I would that deal with perfectly precise
Notions so I don't exactly there are
mathematical theorems given a certain
set of
um rules of inference
but those rules of inference can cannot
be proved to be true they might be false
they are just conjectures
and there might come a time when we
conjecture different rules of inference
are are valid
right and the second thing I wanted to
ask that is similar to this one is how
do you think about
um
paradoxical sentences like the liar
sentence which uh uh asserts itself
falsity I mean perhaps you might say
that this is the object language meta
language error but what would you say if
I know you have what's known as liar
cycles and I say that's uh what whatever
Professor Deutsch says is false and you
say that whatever I say is true so you
don't have this hierarchical sorry
hierarchy levels but it's just a cyclic
Clash which cannot be so easily uh
solved by an object language yes so if
if we jointly say things
which refer to each other
and which lead to a contradiction then
there is no proposition corresponding to
those
right so proposition has to be either
true or false
yeah I'm thinking that if you'd say that
about the liar sentence which doesn't
have the cycle then perhaps you would
get this sort of Revenge Paradox and you
say well this is kind of actually what
it says consider the sentence this
sentence does not express a true
proposition and if you say that this is
not does not express a preposition that
is either true or false then in
particular is not true
uh so you basically get it back yes that
so proposition also has to be perfectly
precise and unambiguous
so I I think those those kind by the way
I think that particular one
is a language meta language uh error
yeah I know I guess you can have it for
the Cycles back but it's more explicit
if you right if you have it this way
okay yeah well if something doesn't make
sense it's not a proposition
okay
the propositions can be true or false
yes must be yeah
um
okay then we have another question by uh
poch
uh thanks a lot for the talk Dave it's
very very interesting
um I'm not sure if this will be a
question uh but I'm trying to wrap my
head around the the kind of tree
uh kind of levels let's say of you have
a statement
which corresponds to abstract
propositions as a kind of intermediary
you could say so let's say if the
statement refers to the physical world
um then there will be a an abstract
proposition
which will correspond to the physical
world in some way and I guess my
question is
previously I would have thought of
um
all uh so I guess I'm the thing I'm
thinking about like whether all abstract
propositions have this uh are absolutely
necessary true
and because
um
statements or are so like some some of
the propositions that the physical world
say will be
uh contingent
their truths will be contingent on the
physical world
um
and I'm not yeah I'm not sure if there's
a solid question here but I thought
maybe you could uh just comment on that
well the so the statements are are
always going to be vague
uh and yes they're continued on the
physical world and their their meaning
is is is uh is vague and they might even
um be somewhat contradictory but we are
guessing that they correspond to sorry
no I shouldn't use the word
correspondence
we're guessing that there is a
proposition that this statement is an
approximation to which is good enough in
the context of the problem we're solving
and what we're guessing there and then
we're guessing that the proposition is
true as well well we're guessing is that
this exact thing the proposition
corresponds exactly to this other exact
thing the the physical world
we we wanted to say something about the
physical world but that's the only way
we can do it via statements which
represent propositions which I guess is
about propositions which which then say
something about physical world usually
when we when we aren't interested in
talking about truth
when we're only interested in talking
about the world we can do our usual
thing of talking directly about the
world and saying things like dogs have
four legs
and uh but it's it's only when
somebody asks what would it mean for
that to be false what would it mean for
what does what does it mean for that to
be true
what does it mean for it to be
approximately true what are you doing
when you try and make it more precise by
saying uh canis familiaris instead of
dog
and so on then
I think you're immediately forced to uh
talk about the third side of that third
vertex of that triangle as well
and say what what we mean about it being
true is not that the statement is true
it's that the problem we're we're
guessing that there's a proposition
there that is true
okay okay and
um
my previous uh kind of conception of
this from like reading your own work uh
I'm not sure if this is um exactly your
idea but as something I've gathered from
Reading fabric of reality for example
and beginning of infinity was that
um
the to say that a statement a physical
object of a statement contains truth
means that the sort of the knowledge
contents the the uh the information
instantiated within the
the sound let's say
that there's like a physical
um
I think you referred to this as like a
self-similarity within the physical
world or there's like one part of the
physical world that's
analogous in some ways to another
um So within this conception of and so
that's that's previously what I taught
the idea of Truth was as well but but
you're saying that it would actually be
more that there's a there's an abstract
proposition which is in this like
platonic Realm
that's kind of is it is required to
stand between those
or does that make sense I can't remember
whether I said in either of my books
that that this sort of Correspondence
you refer to
is truth that that that's what it means
for a statement to be true I think I may
have said it's what it means for it to
contain knowledge okay okay and that I
would stick to now I I don't but I I do
think that I was a bit confused about
truth
in both of my books so if whatever I
said about truth has to be uh it has to
be upgraded with this new theory that
that is assuming
that there isn't some some flaw in it I
I'm I'm hoping that that you guys uh
will find the floor uh it's in time for
me to not put it into my next book
yeah I certain haven't found that but
thanks a lot for the talk and the
answering the question yeah thanks for
your question
um
then I see Danny has a question Daniel
Regan go ahead
hi can you hear me now uh I seem to have
very badly timed technical issues there
the last time I am I'm similar to
college this is less of a question and
I'm just kind of hoping you can clear up
some stuff for me to make sure that I'm
following
so we have uh reality and reality is
perfectly precise and it is the way it
is and then you have this world of
abstractions which include propositions
and they are perfectly precise as well
and that is what allows uh things like
propositions to either be true or false
it's the fact that they have this uh
perfect Precision yes and and then we
have
the statements that we can make so when
we conjecture things
we can only ever conjecture statements
and then there are propositions trying
to be captured is it in those statements
um is is and
when we you said near the start you said
people want to make we're fallibleists
so we want to make progress in our
ideas is that about making progress in
um better capturing the like let's say
the propositions with our statements or
is it making progress in the sense that
you're ruling out
false propositions let's say
so oh it's okay wait
we make errors everywhere yeah so that
uh when we try and uh theorize about
dogs that there's whether we're right
about dogs is one thing whether we're
right about
uh the abstract proposition through
which we're talking about dogs like you
know the the the canis familiaris sort
of thing whether we're right right that
that is a good way of uh being more
precise about dogs that that's another
thing that we can be wrong about and and
in general we are wrong and vague so
right
um so so we we fallibly try to guess or
try to represent fallible propositions
about the world yes uh that I'm afraid
putting it that way it does sound is a
bit labored doesn't it it it's like it
doesn't sound like God's truth no I
can't see any a way of avoiding it at
the moment because of this fundamental
thing that
we can't
say perfectly accurate things and and
but the world is perfectly accurate so
how can one correspond to the other so I
think this is the only possible way and
very very quickly so is it are you
saying that it's in principle impossible
for a statement to ever
uh
capture perfectly capture an opposition
and that's because of the inherent uh
vagueness and imposition in Precision
that's avoidable or that's it that's
unavoidable yes it it uh I think it's in
principle impossible so Papa quotes and
oftenes saying even if by chance he were
to utter the final truth he would
himself not know it I think that's
actually strictly speaking false yes
that was that was going to be my my
thing is so so it's it's
right okay that's fine that's fine thank
you
does it also mean that there is more
progress possible than popular imagines
because we we can be even more wrong
than proper imagined we could be in some
sense
good point yeah yeah I think that's true
nice
um
then
just just so people know I think we have
uh roughly another 10 minutes uh
and then we will end the event
uh so we're approaching final questions
but not yet we're not yet there
um
I see there are more people in the chat
who have a raised hand uh Ernst would
you like to ask a question
yeah thank you
so my question is sort of only tangent
well tangentially related to this Theory
so it's about sort of how to think about
rational action in the face of ignorance
right now in this uh during last year
and so on
there was a lot of ignorance and a lot
of actions and a lot of mistakes and
then nothing taleb I don't know how much
you know about him but he
he's a sort of admirer of popper but he
takes
in my understanding of him he takes the
proper uncertainty
to mean something mathematical
whereas and to translate it into some
kind of probabilities whereas that would
be a mistake yeah that's a that's a
mistake so so
but his argument about okay when there
is uncertainty like do I do I know if
this pilot is a trained pilot or not if
that answer uncertain they exist then
you shouldn't get into the plane but of
course we're always uncertain so that
can't be
the explanation
but how do you think about this how to
think about actions when we don't know
yes what is true once I'm tempted to say
once you stop thinking in terms of
probability uh the all the problems go
away okay the uh you you have a certain
explanatory theory about how this person
in the uniform that's getting into the
cockpit of the plane got there
and the reason that you adopt that
theory and act in exactly the same way
that you would act if you were certain
that it was true
which you can't be but
um it is that that
um all the other explanations is not
that you can rule out all the other
explanations but all the other
explanations that you can't rule out are
bad explanations they are all of the
form well it could be that the the real
pilot was mugged on the way here and and
this guy is actually a a fantasist who
thinks he's a pilot but will actually
crash the plane as as soon as it takes
off now the thing is I just made that up
I could make up lots of stories some of
which would mean that you were even
safer than you thought and some of which
would where where where you'd be in even
more danger than that and it'd all be
bad explanations because they can all be
just made up at will any number of them
you have to reject all explanations like
that not because they're unlikely but
because the practice of adopting one of
them in preference to the others is
irrational
um
so it's good explanations all the way
down
so then when we don't have good
explanations
well if if we don't have good
explanations then then we have
inadequate explanations if we have only
bad explanations
then uh we don't know anything we're
just in trouble it's like saying you
know I'm either going to kill you or not
depending on whether you say A or B now
say something
well you know if you don't know you
don't know there isn't a right thing to
do
but uh the the cases you're talking
about like like decisions about the
pandemic are uh cases where we have some
some explanations that aren't good good
enough
um in the sense that they are the only
good explanation left that the others
can all be ruled out by one argument or
another or that the
rival
explanations are all bad but we have
two or three or a hundred
fairly good explanations
but uh the others can't be ruled out
well in that case uh the uh there is
there is more than one reasonable way to
behave different people will see this
spectrum of a hundred decent but but by
no means good enough explanations and
their background knowledge and and other
theories will select between them
um that is we we will differ as to how
good the good explanations are
um we might agree on what's a bad
explanation but uh we may not agree on
how good the good explanation is and and
then there are other
uh considerations like uh
um we mustn't make choices that will
prevent us from learning things
but of course we don't want to
um uh use that as our only Criterion
because if we learn something by wiping
out half the human race yes okay the
other half will be well off then but the
half that are killed will will still be
killed so so uh that's just one of the
considerations
that uh come into the situation that
there's more than one reasonable choice
and uh I've been tweeting a lot about
choices in the pandemic situation and
quite often the point I'm trying to make
is that people are getting very upset
and enraged with each other because they
think that the other person's
explanation isn't as good as theirs but
they don't have
uh an actual scientific argument or
scientific evidence or or
water type argument that says that they
just think it's true for some reason or
another
um sometimes people think that bad
explanations are actually good but
that's that's not what I'm talking about
I'm talking about disputes about rival
good explanations like
masks work
how well do masks work
now there's really no evidence about how
well masked worked it stands to reason
that masks work up to a point but then
there are issues like yes but if the
government says that people should wear
masks then people will get
correspondingly more lacks in their
other distancing Behavior and the net
effect will be worse and
there's no way that science can't answer
that question just yet and it won't be
able to answer it in time but reasonable
people can disagree
and uh that's what we have to do we have
to disagree
all right thank you very much
uh thank you for your question and um
then we have Mike skiba
go ahead
all right uh hi David uh thank you Sam
um uh so yeah early on the discussion
you mentioned uh p and NP and um and you
you described p as like a propositional
uh variable which yeah I think is an
interesting concept and I was wondering
that was a different P oh sorry uh a
different p in the in terms of the MP
yeah yeah so RP and not P were you
saying we still have it all that's uh
here in this in this uh that that's not
pnnp that's just p a propositional
variable okay
um yes yeah my mistake and um yeah I
guess kind of season on that
propositional variable idea
um I was wondering if um based on kind
of the centrality of uh the laws of
physics in your world view and and
assuming that there is not really a
finality that we can speak to of the
laws of physics if you would describe
them as a propositional variable
um kind of in this sense of statements
and abstractions I was wondering if
there was a link potentially there so
yeah so I I
um uh tend to
regard
statements out the world and statements
about abstractions uniformly
uh we're fallible in both cases uh we we
can make mistakes we are uh we are we
are inherently imprecise and and all
that stuff but we can there's no limit
to how much knowledge we can uh know
about so P the p p versus NP thing
uh is an example of an actual
proposition which could
that this P the the the propositional
variable could be set equal to P the
actual proposition about
um about computability
um uh so yeah I
uh
I I view them all as the same kind of
thing we can guess about
mathematic mathematical objects we can
guess about sets we can guess about the
physical world we can guess about
morality we can guess about beauty and
all those things we can gain knowledge
about we gain it in the same way
nothing is ever certain including the
most mathematical things and including
propositions about necessary truths
um our knowledge of them is always
fallible as well
no that's helpful yeah just because
knowing yeah the laws of physics and
what they mean in like your momentous
dichotomy just that that is also you
know uh qualifies in that in that range
too so thank you
great okay then I have a final question
before we end the talk
um
so
in in your construction there's really
Two Worlds there's the world well it
seems like there's three worlds there's
the world of statements propositions and
reality
and statements are part of physical
reality yes and
we are guessing at both of them in a
sense we're guessing at the statements
and we're guessing at reality
yes through guessing at statements yes
and
so part of what we do when we we try to
learn about something is being as
precise as necessary
yeah um do you think that this means
that uh paradoxes have are problems that
can be resolved there are problems with
how we think about the abstraction so if
someone says some if someone utters the
Liar's Paradox they're really they're
being imprecise but they're meaning
something real
and there we can make progress in
uh are thinking about the propositions
as well
yeah I I think
um
it's very rare for people to
intentionally talk nonsense
uh you know no doubt it could be done
and no doubt it is done in some
circumstances but but basically when
people talk nonsense it's because they
really mean something and that nonsense
is is actually an attempt
to understand the world or to understand
an abstraction or whatever
and
um
and at the other end of the scale as I
keep saying uh we might all be talking
nonsense if if things like the the
integers uh arithmetically integers uh
is inconsistent
um so yeah I I
um is that what you meant I mean uh
yes I think I meant that when people so
there's a sense in which we can resolve
a paradox when someone
uh
if we ever stumbled upon a paradox
in formulating physics or something then
there is a way of of being more precise
and being yes the resolving of resolving
the issue oh yes yes abstractions
accidentally hitting on a paradox is
just one of the many ways we can be
mistaken
right
great
um yeah with that thanks so much for
joining us this was great uh thanks
everyone for the question fun thanks for
having me yeah okay
um thanks so much and see you at the
next event bye